Extended nonlocal games
==========================

In this tutorial, we will define the concept of an *extended nonlocal game*.
Extended nonlocal games are a more general abstraction of nonlocal games
wherein the referee, who previously only provided questions and answers to the
players, now share a state with the players and is able to perform a
measurement on that shared state. 

Every extended nonlocal game has a *value* associated to it. Analogously to
nonlocal games, this value is a quantity that dictates how well the players can
perform a task in the extended nonlocal game model when given access to certain
resources. We will be using :code:`|toqito⟩` to calculate these quantities.

We will also look at existing results in the literature on these values and be
able to replicate them using :code:`|toqito⟩`. Much of the written content in
this tutorial will be directly taken from :cite:`Russo_2017_Extended`.

Extended nonlocal games have a natural physical interpretation in the setting
of tripartite steering :cite:`Cavalcanti_2015_Detection` and in device-independent quantum scenarios :cite:`Tomamichel_2013_AMonogamy`. For
more information on extended nonlocal games, please refer to :cite:`Johnston_2016_Extended` and
:cite:`Russo_2017_Extended`.

The extended nonlocal game model
--------------------------------

An *extended nonlocal game* is similar to a nonlocal game in the sense that it
is a cooperative game played between two players Alice and Bob against a
referee. The game begins much like a nonlocal game, with the referee selecting
and sending a pair of questions :math:`(x,y)` according to a fixed probability
distribution. Once Alice and Bob receive :math:`x` and :math:`y`, they respond
with respective answers :math:`a` and :math:`b`. Unlike a nonlocal game, the
outcome of an extended nonlocal game is determined by measurements performed by
the referee on its share of the state initially provided to it by Alice and
Bob. 

.. figure:: figures/extended_nonlocal_game.svg
   :alt: extened nonlocal game
   :align: center

   An extended nonlocal game.

Specifically, Alice and Bob's winning probability is determined by
collections of measurements, :math:`V(a,b|x,y) \in \text{Pos}(\mathcal{R})`,
where :math:`\mathcal{R} = \mathbb{C}^m` is a complex Euclidean space with
:math:`m` denoting the dimension of the referee's quantum system--so if Alice
and Bob's response :math:`(a,b)` to the question pair :math:`(x,y)` leaves the
referee's system in the quantum state

.. math::
    \sigma_{a,b}^{x,y} \in \text{D}(\mathcal{R}),

then their winning and losing probabilities are given by

.. math::
    \left\langle V(a,b|x,y), \sigma_{a,b}^{x,y} \right\rangle 
    \quad \text{and} \quad 
    \left\langle \mathbb{I} - V(a,b|x,y), \sigma_{a,b}^{x,y} \right\rangle.

Strategies for extended nonlocal games
---------------------------------------

An extended nonlocal game :math:`G` is defined by a pair :math:`(\pi, V)`,
where :math:`\pi` is a probability distribution of the form

.. math::
    \pi : \Sigma_A \times \Sigma_B \rightarrow [0, 1]

on the Cartesian product of two alphabets :math:`\Sigma_A` and
:math:`\Sigma_B`, and :math:`V` is a function of the form

.. math::
    V : \Gamma_A \times \Gamma_B \times \Sigma_A \times \Sigma_B \rightarrow \text{Pos}(\mathcal{R})

for :math:`\Sigma_A` and :math:`\Sigma_B` as above, :math:`\Gamma_A` and
:math:`\Gamma_B` being alphabets, and :math:`\mathcal{R}` refers to the
referee's space. Just as in the case for nonlocal games, we shall use the
convention that

.. math::
    \Sigma = \Sigma_A \times \Sigma_B \quad \text{and} \quad \Gamma = \Gamma_A \times \Gamma_B

to denote the respective sets of questions asked to Alice and Bob and the sets
of answers sent from Alice and Bob to the referee.

When analyzing a strategy for Alice and Bob, it may be convenient to define a
function

.. math::
    K : \Gamma_A \times \Gamma_B \times \Sigma_A \times \Sigma_B \rightarrow \text{Pos}(\mathcal{R}).

We can represent Alice and Bob's winning probability for an extended nonlocal
game as

.. math::
    \sum_{(x,y) \in \Sigma} \pi(x,y) \sum_{(a,b) \in \Gamma} \left\langle V(a,b|x,y), K(a,b|x,y) \right\rangle.

Standard quantum strategies for extended nonlocal games
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A *standard quantum strategy* for an extended nonlocal game consists of
finite-dimensional complex Euclidean spaces :math:`\mathcal{U}` for Alice and
:math:`\mathcal{V}` for Bob, a quantum state :math:`\sigma \in
\text{D}(\mathcal{U} \otimes \mathcal{R} \otimes \mathcal{V})`, and two
collections of measurements

.. math::
    \{ A_a^x : a \in \Gamma_A \} \subset \text{Pos}(\mathcal{U})
    \quad \text{and} \quad
    \{ B_b^y : b \in \Gamma_B \} \subset \text{Pos}(\mathcal{V}),

for each :math:`x \in \Sigma_A` and :math:`y \in \Sigma_B` respectively. As
usual, the measurement operators satisfy the constraint that

.. math::
    \sum_{a \in \Gamma_A} A_a^x = \mathbb{I}_{\mathcal{U}} 
    \quad \text{and} \quad
    \sum_{b \in \Gamma_B} B_b^y = \mathbb{I}_{\mathcal{V}},

for each :math:`x \in \Sigma_A` and :math:`y \in \Sigma_B`.

When the game is played, Alice and Bob present the referee with a quantum
system so that the three parties share the state :math:`\sigma \in
\text{D}(\mathcal{U} \otimes \mathcal{R} \otimes \mathcal{V})`. The referee
selects questions :math:`(x,y) \in \Sigma` according to the distribution
:math:`\pi` that is known to all participants in the game.

The referee then sends :math:`x` to Alice and :math:`y` to Bob. At this point,
Alice and Bob make measurements on their respective portions of the state
:math:`\sigma` using their measurement operators to yield an outcome to send
back to the referee. Specifically, Alice measures her portion of the state
:math:`\sigma` with respect to her set of measurement operators :math:`\{A_a^x
: a \in \Gamma_A\}`, and sends the result :math:`a \in \Gamma_A` of this
measurement to the referee. Likewise, Bob measures his portion of the state
:math:`\sigma` with respect to his measurement operators 
:math:`\{B_b^y : b \in \Gamma_B\}` to yield the outcome :math:`b \in \Gamma_B`,
that is then sent back to the referee.

At the end of the protocol, the referee measures its quantum system with
respect to the measurement :math:`\{V(a,b|x,y), \mathbb{I}-V(a,b|x,y)\}`.

The winning probability for such a strategy in this game :math:`G = (\pi,V)` is
given by

.. math::
    \sum_{(x,y) \in \Sigma} \pi(x,y) \sum_{(a,b) \in \Gamma}
    \left \langle A_a^x \otimes V(a,b|x,y) \otimes B_b^y,
    \sigma
    \right \rangle.

For a given extended nonlocal game :math:`G = (\pi,V)`, we write
:math:`\omega^*(G)` to denote the *standard quantum value* of :math:`G`, which
is the supremum value of Alice and Bob's winning probability over all standard
quantum strategies for :math:`G`.

Unentangled strategies for extended nonlocal games
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An *unentangled strategy* for an extended nonlocal game is simply a standard
quantum strategy for which the state :math:`\sigma \in \text{D}(\mathcal{U}
\otimes \mathcal{R} \otimes \mathcal{V})` initially prepared by Alice and Bob
is fully separable.

Any unentangled strategy is equivalent to a strategy where Alice and Bob store
only classical information after the referee's quantum system has been provided
to it.

For a given extended nonlocal game :math:`G = (\pi, V)` we write
:math:`\omega(G)` to denote the *unentangled value* of :math:`G`, which is the
supremum value for Alice and Bob's winning probability in :math:`G` over all
unentangled strategies. The unentangled value of any extended nonlocal game,
:math:`G`, may be written as

.. math::
    \omega(G) = \max_{f, g}
    \lVert
    \sum_{(x,y) \in \Sigma} \pi(x,y)
    V(f(x), g(y)|x, y)
    \rVert

where the maximum is over all functions :math:`f : \Sigma_A \rightarrow
\Gamma_A` and :math:`g : \Sigma_B \rightarrow \Gamma_B`.

Non-signaling strategies for extended nonlocal games
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A *non-signaling strategy* for an extended nonlocal game consists of a function

.. math::
    K : \Gamma_A \times \Gamma_B \times \Sigma_A \times \Sigma_B \rightarrow \text{Pos}(\mathcal{R})

such that

.. math::
    \sum_{a \in \Gamma_A} K(a,b|x,y) = \rho_b^y \quad \text{and} \quad \sum_{b \in \Gamma_B} K(a,b|x,y) = \sigma_a^x,

for all :math:`x \in \Sigma_A` and :math:`y \in \Sigma_B` where
:math:`\{\rho_b^y : y \in \Sigma_B, b \in \Gamma_B\}` and :math:`\{\sigma_a^x:
x \in \Sigma_A, a \in \Gamma_A\}` are collections of operators satisfying

.. math::
    \sum_{a \in \Gamma_A} \sigma_a^x = \tau = \sum_{b \in \Gamma_B} \rho_b^y,

for every choice of :math:`x \in \Sigma_A` and :math:`y \in \Sigma_B` and where
:math:`\tau \in \text{D}(\mathcal{R})` is a density operator.

For any extended nonlocal game, :math:`G = (\pi, V)`, the winning probability
for a non-signaling strategy is given by

.. math::
    \sum_{(x,y) \in \Sigma} \pi(x,y) \sum_{(a,b) \in \Gamma} \left\langle V(a,b|x,y) K(a,b|x,y) \right\rangle.

We denote the *non-signaling value* of :math:`G` as :math:`\omega_{ns}(G)`
which is the supremum value of the winning probability of :math:`G` taken over
all non-signaling strategies for Alice and Bob.

Relationships between different strategies and values
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For an extended nonlocal game, :math:`G`, the values have the following relationship:


.. note::
    .. math::
        0 \leq \omega(G) \leq \omega^*(G) \leq \omega_{ns}(G) \leq 1.


.. _ref-label-bb84_extended_nl_example:

Example: The BB84 extended nonlocal game
-----------------------------------------

The *BB84 extended nonlocal game* is defined as follows. Let :math:`\Sigma_A =
\Sigma_B = \Gamma_A = \Gamma_B = \{0,1\}`, define

.. math::
    \begin{equation}
        \begin{aligned}
            V(0,0|0,0) = \begin{pmatrix}
                            1 & 0 \\
                            0 & 0
                         \end{pmatrix}, &\quad
            V(1,1|0,0) = \begin{pmatrix}
                            0 & 0 \\
                            0 & 1
                         \end{pmatrix}, \\
            V(0,0|1,1) = \frac{1}{2}\begin{pmatrix}
                            1 & 1 \\
                            1 & 1
                         \end{pmatrix}, &\quad
            V(1,1|1,1) = \frac{1}{2}\begin{pmatrix}
                            1 & -1 \\
                            -1 & 1
                         \end{pmatrix},
        \end{aligned}
    \end{equation}

define 

.. math::
    V(a,b|x,y) = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix}

for all :math:`a \not= b` or :math:`x \not= y`, define :math:`\pi(0,0) =
\pi(1,1) = 1/2`, and define :math:`\pi(x,y) = 0` if :math:`x \not=y`.

We can encode the BB84 game, :math:`G_{BB84} = (\pi, V)`, in :code:`numpy`
arrays where :code:`prob_mat` corresponds to the probability distribution
:math:`\pi` and where :code:`pred_mat` corresponds to the operator :math:`V`. 

.. code-block:: python
    
    >>> # Define the BB84 extended nonlocal game.
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from toqito.states import basis
    >>>
    >>> # The basis: {|0>, |1>}:
    >>> e_0, e_1 = basis(2, 0), basis(2, 1)
    >>>
    >>> # The basis: {|+>, |->}:
    >>> e_p = (e_0 + e_1) / np.sqrt(2)
    >>> e_m = (e_0 - e_1) / np.sqrt(2)
    >>>
    >>> # The dimension of referee's measurement operators:
    >>> dim = 2
    >>> # The number of outputs for Alice and Bob:
    >>> a_out, b_out = 2, 2
    >>> # The number of inputs for Alice and Bob:
    >>> a_in, b_in = 2, 2
    >>> 
    >>> # Define the predicate matrix V(a,b|x,y) \in Pos(R)
    >>> bb84_pred_mat = np.zeros([dim, dim, a_out, b_out, a_in, b_in])
    >>>
    >>> # V(0,0|0,0) = |0><0|
    >>> bb84_pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 0, 0] = e_0 @ e_0.conj().T
    >>> # V(1,1|0,0) = |1><1|
    >>> bb84_pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 0, 0] = e_1 @ e_1.conj().T
    >>> # V(0,0|1,1) = |+><+|
    >>> bb84_pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 1, 1] = e_p @ e_p.conj().T
    >>> # V(1,1|1,1) = |-><-|
    >>> bb84_pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 1, 1] = e_m @ e_m.conj().T
    >>>
    >>> # The probability matrix encode \pi(0,0) = \pi(1,1) = 1/2
    >>> bb84_prob_mat = 1/2*np.identity(2)

The unentangled value of the BB84 extended nonlocal game
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It was shown in :cite:`Tomamichel_2013_AMonogamy` and :cite:`Johnston_2016_Extended` that

.. math::
    \omega(G_{BB84}) = \cos^2(\pi/8).

This can be verified in :code:`|toqito⟩` as follows.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # Calculate the unentangled value of the BB84 extended nonlocal game.
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define an ExtendedNonlocalGame object based on the BB84 game.
    >>> bb84 = ExtendedNonlocalGame(bb84_prob_mat, bb84_pred_mat)
    >>> 
    >>> # The unentangled value is cos(pi/8)**2 \approx 0.85356
    >>> np.around(bb84.unentangled_value(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.85)

The BB84 game also exhibits strong parallel repetition. We can specify how many
parallel repetitions for :code:`|toqito⟩` to run. The example below provides an
example of two parallel repetitions for the BB84 game.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # The unentangled value of BB84 under parallel repetition.
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define the bb84 game for two parallel repetitions.
    >>> bb84_2_reps = ExtendedNonlocalGame(bb84_prob_mat, bb84_pred_mat, 2)
    >>> 
    >>> # The unentangled value for two parallel repetitions is cos(pi/8)**4 \approx 0.72855
    >>> np.around(bb84_2_reps.unentangled_value(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.73)

It was shown in :cite:`Johnston_2016_Extended` that the BB84 game possesses the property of strong
parallel repetition. That is,

.. math::
    \omega(G_{BB84}^r) = \omega(G_{BB84})^r

for any integer :math:`r`. 

The standard quantum value of the BB84 extended nonlocal game
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We can calculate lower bounds on the standard quantum value of the BB84 game
using :code:`|toqito⟩` as well.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # Calculate lower bounds on the standard quantum value of the BB84 extended nonlocal game.
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define an ExtendedNonlocalGame object based on the BB84 game.
    >>> bb84_lb = ExtendedNonlocalGame(bb84_prob_mat, bb84_pred_mat)
    >>> 
    >>> # The standard quantum value is cos(pi/8)**2 \approx 0.85356
    >>> np.around(bb84_lb.quantum_value_lower_bound(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.85)

From :cite:`Johnston_2016_Extended`, it is known that :math:`\omega(G_{BB84}) =
\omega^*(G_{BB84})`, however, if we did not know this beforehand, we could
attempt to calculate upper bounds on the standard quantum value. 

There are a few methods to do this, but one easy way is to simply calculate the
non-signaling value of the game as this provides a natural upper bound on the
standard quantum value. Typically, this bound is not tight and usually not all
that useful in providing tight upper bounds on the standard quantum value,
however, in this case, it will prove to be useful.

The non-signaling value of the BB84 extended nonlocal game
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Using :code:`|toqito⟩`, we can see that :math:`\omega_{ns}(G) = \cos^2(\pi/8)`.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # Calculate the non-signaling value of the BB84 extended nonlocal game.
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define an ExtendedNonlocalGame object based on the BB84 game.
    >>> bb84 = ExtendedNonlocalGame(bb84_prob_mat, bb84_pred_mat)
    >>> 
    >>> # The non-signaling value is cos(pi/8)**2 \approx 0.85356
    >>> np.around(bb84.nonsignaling_value(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.85)

So we have the relationship that

.. math::
    \omega(G_{BB84}) = \omega^*(G_{BB84}) = \omega_{ns}(G_{BB84}) = \cos^2(\pi/8).

It turns out that strong parallel repetition does *not* hold in the
non-signaling scenario for the BB84 game. This was shown in :cite:`Russo_2017_Extended`, and we
can observe this by the following snippet.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # The non-signaling value of BB84 under parallel repetition.
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define the bb84 game for two parallel repetitions.
    >>> bb84_2_reps = ExtendedNonlocalGame(bb84_prob_mat, bb84_pred_mat, 2)
    >>> 
    >>> # The non-signaling value for two parallel repetitions is cos(pi/8)**4 \approx 0.73825
    >>> np.around(bb84_2_reps.nonsignaling_value(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.74)

Note that :math:`0.73825 \geq \cos(\pi/8)^4 \approx 0.72855` and therefore we
have that

.. math::
    \omega_{ns}(G^r_{BB84}) \not= \omega_{ns}(G_{BB84})^r

for :math:`r = 2`.

Example: The CHSH extended nonlocal game
-----------------------------------------

Let us now define another extended nonlocal game, :math:`G_{CHSH}`.

Let :math:`\Sigma_A = \Sigma_B = \Gamma_A = \Gamma_B = \{0,1\}`, define a
collection of measurements :math:`\{V(a,b|x,y) : a \in \Gamma_A, b \in
\Gamma_B, x \in \Sigma_A, y \in \Sigma_B\} \subset \text{Pos}(\mathcal{R})`
such that

.. math::
    \begin{equation}
        \begin{aligned}
            V(0,0|0,0) = V(0,0|0,1) = V(0,0|1,0) = \begin{pmatrix}
                                                    1 & 0 \\
                                                    0 & 0
                                                   \end{pmatrix}, \\
            V(1,1|0,0) = V(1,1|0,1) = V(1,1|1,0) = \begin{pmatrix}
                                                    0 & 0 \\
                                                    0 & 1
                                                   \end{pmatrix}, \\
            V(0,1|1,1) = \frac{1}{2}\begin{pmatrix}
                                        1 & 1 \\
                                        1 & 1
                                    \end{pmatrix}, \\
            V(1,0|1,1) = \frac{1}{2} \begin{pmatrix}
                                        1 & -1 \\
                                        -1 & 1
                                     \end{pmatrix},
        \end{aligned}
    \end{equation}

define 

.. math::
    V(a,b|x,y) = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix}

for all :math:`a \oplus b \not= x \land y`, and define :math:`\pi(0,0) =
\pi(0,1) = \pi(1,0) = \pi(1,1) = 1/4`.

In the event that :math:`a \oplus b \not= x \land y`, the referee's measurement
corresponds to the zero matrix. If instead it happens that :math:`a \oplus b =
x \land y`, the referee then proceeds to measure with respect to one of the
measurement operators. This winning condition is reminiscent of the standard
CHSH nonlocal game.

We can encode :math:`G_{CHSH}` in a similar way using :code:`numpy` arrays as
we did for :math:`G_{BB84}`.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # Define the CHSH extended nonlocal game.
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>>
    >>> # The dimension of referee's measurement operators:
    >>> dim = 2
    >>> # The number of outputs for Alice and Bob:
    >>> a_out, b_out = 2, 2
    >>> # The number of inputs for Alice and Bob:
    >>> a_in, b_in = 2, 2
    >>> 
    >>> # Define the predicate matrix V(a,b|x,y) \in Pos(R)
    >>> chsh_pred_mat = np.zeros([dim, dim, a_out, b_out, a_in, b_in])
    >>>
    >>> # V(0,0|0,0) = V(0,0|0,1) = V(0,0|1,0).
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 0, 0] = np.array([[1, 0], [0, 0]])
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 0, 1] = np.array([[1, 0], [0, 0]])
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 1, 0] = np.array([[1, 0], [0, 0]])
    >>>
    >>> # V(1,1|0,0) = V(1,1|0,1) = V(1,1|1,0).
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 0, 0] = np.array([[0, 0], [0, 1]])
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 0, 1] = np.array([[0, 0], [0, 1]])
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 1, 0] = np.array([[0, 0], [0, 1]])
    >>>
    >>> # V(0,1|1,1)
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 0, 1, 1, 1] = 1/2 * np.array([[1, 1], [1, 1]])
    >>>
    >>> # V(1,0|1,1)
    >>> chsh_pred_mat[:, :, 1, 0, 1, 1] = 1/2 * np.array([[1, -1], [-1, 1]])
    >>>
    >>> # The probability matrix encode \pi(0,0) = \pi(0,1) = \pi(1,0) = \pi(1,1) = 1/4.
    >>> chsh_prob_mat = np.array([[1/4, 1/4], [1/4, 1/4]])


Example: The unentangled value of the CHSH extended nonlocal game
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similar to what we did for the BB84 extended nonlocal game, we can also compute
the unentangled value of :math:`G_{CHSH}`.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # Calculate the unentangled value of the CHSH extended nonlocal game
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define an ExtendedNonlocalGame object based on the CHSH game.
    >>> chsh = ExtendedNonlocalGame(chsh_prob_mat, chsh_pred_mat)
    >>> 
    >>> # The unentangled value is 3/4 = 0.75
    >>> np.around(chsh.unentangled_value(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.75)

We can also run multiple repetitions of :math:`G_{CHSH}`.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # The unentangled value of CHSH under parallel repetition.
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define the CHSH game for two parallel repetitions.
    >>> chsh_2_reps = ExtendedNonlocalGame(chsh_prob_mat, chsh_pred_mat, 2)
    >>> 
    >>> # The unentangled value for two parallel repetitions is (3/4)**2 \approx 0.5625
    >>> np.around(chsh_2_reps.unentangled_value(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.56)

Note that strong parallel repetition holds as

.. math::
    \omega(G_{CHSH})^2 = \omega(G_{CHSH}^2) = \left(\frac{3}{4}\right)^2.

Example: The non-signaling value of the CHSH extended nonlocal game
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To obtain an upper bound for :math:`G_{CHSH}`, we can calculate the
non-signaling value.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # Calculate the non-signaling value of the CHSH extended nonlocal game.
    >>> from toqito.nonlocal_games.extended_nonlocal_game import ExtendedNonlocalGame
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> # Define an ExtendedNonlocalGame object based on the CHSH game.
    >>> chsh = ExtendedNonlocalGame(chsh_prob_mat, chsh_pred_mat)
    >>> 
    >>> # The non-signaling value is 3/4 = 0.75
    >>> np.around(chsh.nonsignaling_value(), decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.75)

As we know that :math:`\omega(G_{CHSH}) = \omega_{ns}(G_{CHSH}) = 3/4` and that

.. math::
    \omega(G) \leq \omega^*(G) \leq \omega_{ns}(G)

for any extended nonlocal game, :math:`G`, we may also conclude that
:math:`\omega^*(G) = 3/4`.

Note the SCS convex optimization solver will generate a large number of warnings of the form

```
WARN: A->p (column pointers) not strictly increasing
```

This is a known issue, and while it does not appear to impact the correctness
of the results, it is an outstanding issue for the :code:`|toqito⟩` project.

Example: An extended nonlocal game with quantum advantage
----------------------------------------------------------

So far, we have only seen examples of extended nonlocal games where the
standard quantum and unentangled values are equal. Here we'll see an example of
an extended nonlocal game where the standard quantum value is *strictly higher*
than the unentangled value.


Example: A monogamy-of-entanglement game with mutually unbiased bases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let :math:`\zeta = \exp(\frac{2 \pi i}{3})` and consider the following four
mutually unbiased bases:

.. math::
    \begin{equation}\label{eq:MUB43}
    \begin{aligned}
      \mathcal{B}_0 &= \left\{ e_0,\: e_1,\: e_2 \right\}, \\
      \mathcal{B}_1 &= \left\{ \frac{e_0 + e_1 + e_2}{\sqrt{3}},\:
      \frac{e_0 + \zeta^2 e_1 + \zeta e_2}{\sqrt{3}},\:
      \frac{e_0 + \zeta e_1 + \zeta^2 e_2}{\sqrt{3}} \right\}, \\
      \mathcal{B}_2 &= \left\{ \frac{e_0 + e_1 + \zeta e_2}{\sqrt{3}},\:
      \frac{e_0 + \zeta^2 e_1 + \zeta^2 e_2}{\sqrt{3}},\:
      \frac{e_0 + \zeta e_1 + e_2}{\sqrt{3}} \right\}, \\
      \mathcal{B}_3 &= \left\{ \frac{e_0 + e_1 + \zeta^2 e_2}{\sqrt{3}},\:
      \frac{e_0 + \zeta^2 e_1 + e_2}{\sqrt{3}},\:
      \frac{e_0 + \zeta e_1 + \zeta e_2}{\sqrt{3}} \right\}.
    \end{aligned}
    \end{equation} 

Define an extended nonlocal game :math:`G_{MUB} = (\pi,R)` so that

.. math::

 		\pi(0) = \pi(1) = \pi(2) = \pi(3) = \frac{1}{4}

and :math:`R` is such that

.. math::
 		{ R(0|x), R(1|x), R(2|x) }

represents a measurement with respect to the basis :math:`\mathcal{B}_x`, for
each :math:`x \in \{0,1,2,3\}`.

Taking the description of :math:`G_{MUB}`, we can encode this as follows.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # Define the monogamy-of-entanglement game defined by MUBs.
    >>> prob_mat = 1 / 4 * np.identity(4)
    >>>
    >>> dim = 3
    >>> e_0, e_1, e_2 = basis(dim, 0), basis(dim, 1), basis(dim, 2)
    >>>
    >>> eta = np.exp((2 * np.pi * 1j) / dim)
    >>> mub_0 = [e_0, e_1, e_2]
    >>> mub_1 = [
    ...      (e_0 + e_1 + e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ...      (e_0 + eta ** 2 * e_1 + eta * e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ...     (e_0 + eta * e_1 + eta ** 2 * e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ... ]
    >>> mub_2 = [
    ...      (e_0 + e_1 + eta * e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ...      (e_0 + eta ** 2 * e_1 + eta ** 2 * e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ...      (e_0 + eta * e_1 + e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ... ]
    >>> mub_3 = [
    ...      (e_0 + e_1 + eta ** 2 * e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ...      (e_0 + eta ** 2 * e_1 + e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ...      (e_0 + eta * e_1 + eta * e_2) / np.sqrt(3),
    ... ]
    >>>
    >>> # List of measurements defined from mutually unbiased basis.
    >>> mubs = [mub_0, mub_1, mub_2, mub_3]
    >>> 
    >>> num_in = 4
    >>> num_out = 3
    >>> pred_mat = np.zeros([dim, dim, num_out, num_out, num_in, num_in], dtype=complex)
    >>>
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 0, 0] = mubs[0][0] @ mubs[0][0].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 0, 0] = mubs[0][1] @ mubs[0][1].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 2, 2, 0, 0] = mubs[0][2] @ mubs[0][2].conj().T
    >>>
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 1, 1] = mubs[1][0] @ mubs[1][0].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 1, 1] = mubs[1][1] @ mubs[1][1].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 2, 2, 1, 1] = mubs[1][2] @ mubs[1][2].conj().T
    >>>
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 2, 2] = mubs[2][0] @ mubs[2][0].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 2, 2] = mubs[2][1] @ mubs[2][1].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 2, 2, 2, 2] = mubs[2][2] @ mubs[2][2].conj().T
    >>>
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 0, 0, 3, 3] = mubs[3][0] @ mubs[3][0].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 1, 1, 3, 3] = mubs[3][1] @ mubs[3][1].conj().T
    >>> pred_mat[:, :, 2, 2, 3, 3] = mubs[3][2] @ mubs[3][2].conj().T

Now that we have encoded :math:`G_{MUB}`, we can calculate the unentangled value.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> g_mub = ExtendedNonlocalGame(prob_mat, pred_mat)
    >>> unent_val = g_mub.unentangled_value()
    >>> np.around(unent_val, decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.65)

That is, we have that 

.. math::

    \omega(G_{MUB}) = \frac{3 + \sqrt{5}}{8} \approx 0.65409.

However, if we attempt to run a lower bound on the standard quantum value, we
obtain.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> g_mub = ExtendedNonlocalGame(prob_mat, pred_mat)
    >>> q_val = g_mub.quantum_value_lower_bound()
    >>> np.around(q_val, decimals=2)
    np.float64(0.66)

Note that as we are calculating a lower bound, it is possible that a value this
high will not be obtained, or in other words, the algorithm can get stuck in a
local maximum that prevents it from finding the global maximum.

It is uncertain what the optimal standard quantum strategy is for this game,
but the value of such a strategy is bounded as follows

.. math::

    2/3 \geq \omega^*(G) \geq 0.6609.

For further information on the :math:`G_{MUB}` game, consult :cite:`Russo_2017_Extended`.

References
------------------------------

.. bibliography:: 
    :filter: docname in docnames
